CHAPTER V.
For some reason or other the house was crowded that night, and the fat Jew manager who met
them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with an oily, tremulous smile. He escorted
them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jeweled hands and talking at
the top of his voice. Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever. He felt as if he had come
Miranda and had been met by Caliban. Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him. At least
he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand, and assured him that he was proud to
be a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over Shakespeare. Hallward amused himself
with watching the faces in the pit. The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight
flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of fire. The youths in the gallery had taken off
their coats and waistcoats and hung them over the side. They talked to each other across the
theatre and shared their oranges with the tawdry painted girls who sat by them. Some women were
laughing in the pit. Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant. The sound of popping corks
came from the bar.
What a place to find one's divinity in, said Lord Henry.
Yes, answered Dorian Gray. It was here I found her, and she is divine beyond all living things.
When she acts, he will forget everything. These common people here, with their coarse faces and
brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage. They sit silently and watch her.
They weep and laugh as she wills them to. She makes them as responsive as a violin.
She spiritualizes them. And one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as oneself.
Oh, I hope not, murmured Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through
his opera-glass.
Don't pay any attention to him, Dorian, said Hallward. I understand what you mean,
and I believe in this girl. Any one you love must be marvelous, and any girl that has the
effect you describe must be fine and noble. To spiritualize one's age, that is something
worth doing. If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, if she can create the
sense of beauty in people whose lives have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their
selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of all your
adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world. This marriage is quite right. I did not think so
at first, but I admit it now. God made Sibyl Vane for you. Without her, you would have been
incomplete.
Thanks, Basil, answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand. I knew that you would understand me.
Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me. But here is the orchestra. It is quite dreadful, but
it only lasts for about five minutes. Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom
I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is good in me.
Quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst the extraordinary turmoil of applause,
Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.
Yes, she was certainly lovely to look at, one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought,
that he had ever seen. There was something of the fawn in her shy grace and startled eyes.
A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she
glanced at the crowded, enthusiastic house. She stepped back a few paces, and her lips seemed to
applaud. Dorian Gray sat motionless, gazing on her like a man in a dream.
Lord Henry peered through his opera glass, murmuring,
Charming, charming!
The scene was the hall of Capulet's house, and Romeo, in his pilgrim's dress, had entered
with Mercutio and his friends. The band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of music,
and the dance began. Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors,
Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a finer world. Her body swayed as she danced,
as a plant sways in the water. The curves of her throat were like the curves of a white lily.
Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.
Yet she was curiously listless. She showed no sign of joy when her eyes rested on Romeo,
the few lines she had to speak. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
which manly devotion shows in this, for saints have hands that pilgrim hands do touch,
and palm to palm is holy Palmer's kiss. With the brief dialogue that follows,
were spoken in thoroughly artificial manner. The voice was exquisite, but from the point of
view of tone it was absolutely false. It was wrong in colour. It took away all the life from
the verse. It made the passion unreal. Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her.
Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. She seemed to them to be absolutely
incompetent. They were horribly disappointed. Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet
is the balcony scene of the second act. They waited for that. If she failed there,
there was nothing in her. She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.
That could not be denied. But the stageyness of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse
as she went on. Her gestures became absurdly artificial. She overemphasised everything that
she had to say. The beautiful passage, Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek for that which thou hast heard me speak to-night,
was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who had been taught to recite by
some second-rate professor of elocution. When she leaned over the balcony and came to those
wonderful lines, although I joy in thee, I have no joy of this contract to-night. It is too rash,
too unadvised, too sudden, too like the lightning which doth cease to be ere one can say it
lightens. Sweet, good-night. This bud of love by summer's ripening breath may prove a beauty's
flower when next we meet. She spoke the words as if they conveyed no meaning to her. It was not
nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous she seemed absolutely self-contained. It was
simply bad art. She was a complete failure. Even the common uneducated audience of the
pit and gallery lost their interest in the play. They got restless and began to talk loudly and to
The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the dress circle, stamped and swore with rage.
The only person unmoved was the girl herself. When the second act was over there came a storm
of hisses and Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.
She's quite beautiful, Dorian, he said, but she can't act. Let us go.
I am going to see the play through, answered the lad in a hard, bitter voice.
I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an evening, Harry. I apologize to both of you.
My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill, interrupted Hallward. We will come some
other night. I wish she was ill, he rejoined, but she seems to me to be simply callous and cold.
She has entirely altered. Last night she was a great artist.
Tonight she is merely a commonplace, mediocre actress.
Don't talk like that about anyone you love, Dorian. Love is a more wonderful thing than art.
They are both simply forms of imitation, murmured Lord Henry.
But do let us go. Dorian, you must not stay here any longer. It is not good for one's
morals to see bad acting. Besides, I don't suppose you will want your wife to act,
so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like a wooden doll? She is very lovely,
and if she knows as little about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience.
There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating,
people who know absolutely everything and people who know absolutely nothing.
Oh, good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic!
The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming.
Come to the club with Basil and myself. We will smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of
Sybilvane. She is beautiful. What more can you want?
Please go away, Harry, cried the lad. I really want to be alone.
Basil, you don't mind my asking you to go.
Can't you see that my heart is breaking? The hot tears came to his eyes. His lips trembled, and
rushing to the back of the box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.
Let us go, Basil, said Lord Henry, with a strange tenderness in his voice,
and the two young men passed out together.
A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up, and the curtain rose on the third act.
Dorian Gray went back to his seat. He looked pale and proud and indifferent.
The play dragged on and seemed interminable. Half the audience went out,
tramping in heavy boots and laughing. The whole thing was a fiasco.
The last act was played to almost empty benches.
As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the green room.
The girl was standing alone there, with a look of triumph on her face.
Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. There was a radiance about her.
Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of their own.
When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy came over her.
"'How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!' she cried.
"'Horribly,' he answered, gazing at her in amazement.
"'Horribly! It was dreadful. Are you ill? You've no idea what it was. You've no
idea what I suffered.' The girl smiled.
"'Dorian,' she answered, lingering on his name with a long-drawn music in her voice,
as though it were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her lips.
"'Dorian, you should have understood. But you understand now, don't you?'
"'Understand what?' he asked angrily.
"'Why I was so bad to-night. Why I shall always be bad. Why I shall never act well again.'
He shrugged his shoulders.
"'You are ill, I suppose. When you are ill, you shouldn't act. You make
yourself ridiculous. My friends were bored. I was bored.'
"'She seemed not to listen to him. She was transfigured with joy, and ecstasy of happiness
dominated her. "'Dorian, Dorian!' she cried.
"'Before I knew you, acting was the one reality in my life. It was only in the theatre that I
lived. I thought that it was all true. I was Roslyn one night and Portia the other. The joy
of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia were mine also. I believed in everything.
The common people who acted with me seemed to me to be godlike. The painted scenes were my world.
I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.
"'You came, oh, my beautiful love, and you freed my soul from prison.
You taught me what reality really is. Tonight, for the first time in my life, I saw through the
hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had always played. Tonight,
for the first time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous and old and painted,
that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words
I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, not what I wanted to say.
You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection.
You have made me understand what love really is. My love, my love, I am sick of shadows.
You are more to me than all art can ever be. What have I to do with the puppets of a play?
When I came on tonight, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone from me.
Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant. The knowledge was exquisite to me. I heard them
hissing, and I smiled. What should they know of love? Take me away, Dorian. Take me away with you,
where we can be quite alone. I hate the stage. I might mimic a passion that I do not feel,
but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire. Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it
all means? Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to play at being in love.
You have made me see that. He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.
You have killed my love, he muttered. She looked at him in wonder and laughed.
He made no answer. She came across to him and stroked his hair with her little fingers.
She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips. He drew them away, and a shudder ran through him.
Then he leapt up and went to the door.
Yes, he cried.
You have killed my love. You used to stir my imagination,
now you don't even stir my curiosity. You simply produce no effect.
I loved you because you were wonderful, because you were genius and intellect,
because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art.
You've thrown it all away. You are shallow and stupid. My God, how mad I was to love you!
What a fool I have been! You are nothing to me now.
I will never see you again. I will never think of you. I will never mention your name.
You don't know what you were to me once. Why, once?
Oh, I can't bear to think of it. I wish I never laid eyes on you. You have spoiled the
romance of my life. How little you can know of love if you say it mars your art. What are
you without your art? Nothing. I would have made you famous, splendid, magnificent.
The world would have worshipped you, and you would have belonged to me.
What do you know? A third-rate actress with a pretty face.
The girl grew white and trembled. She clenched her hands together,
and her voice seemed to catch in her throat.
You are not serious, Dorian. She murmured you are acting.
Acting? I leave that to you. You do it so well.
He answered bitterly. She rose up from her knees and with a
piteous expression of pain in her face came across the room to him.
She put her hand on his arm and looked into his eyes. He thrust her back.
Don't touch me, he cried. A low moan broke from her,
and she flung herself at his feet and lay there like a trampled flower.
Dorian, Dorian, don't leave me, she whispered.
I am sorry I didn't act well. I was thinking of you all the time, but I will try.
Indeed, I will try. It came so suddenly across me. My love for you,
I think I should never have known it if you had not kissed me, if we had not kissed each other.
Kiss me again, my love. Don't go away from me. I couldn't bear it.
Can you forgive me for tonight? I will work so hard and try to improve.
Don't be cruel to me, because I love you better than anything in the world. After all,
it is only once that I have not pleased you. But you are quite right, Dorian. I should have
shown myself more of an artist. It was foolish of me, and yet I couldn't help it. Don't leave me,
don't leave me. A fit of passionate sobbing choked her. She crouched on the floor like a wounded
thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled
in exquisite disdain. There is always something ridiculous about the passions of people whom
one has ceased to love. Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic. Her tears and sobs
annoyed him. I am going, he said at last in his calm, clear voice. I don't wish to be unkind,
but I can't see you again. You have disappointed me. She wept silently and made no answer but
crept nearer to him. Her little hands stretched blindly out and appeared to be seeking for him.
He turned on his heel and left the room. In a few moments he was out of the theatre.
Where he went to he hardly knew. He remembered wandering through dimly lit streets with gaunt
black-shattered archways and evil-looking houses. Women with hoarse voices and harsh
laughter had called after him. Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves
like monstrous apes. He had seen grotesque children huddled upon doorsteps, and had heard
shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts. When the dawn was just breaking he found himself at Covent
Garden. Huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.
The air was heavy with perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne
for his pain. He followed into the market and watched the men unloading their wagons.
A white-smocked carter offered him some cherries. He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept
any money for them, and began to eat them listlessly. They had been plucked in midnight,
and the coldness of the moon had entered into them. A long line of boys carrying crates of
stripped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way
through the huge jade-green piles of vegetables. Under the portico, with its grey sun-bleached
pillars, loitered a troupe of draggled, bare-headed girls waiting for the auction to be over.
After some time he hailed a handsome and drove home. He was pure opal now, and the roofs of the
houses glistened like silver against it. As he was passing through the library towards the door
of his bedroom, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward had painted him. He started back
in surprise, and then went over to it and examined it. In the dim, arrested light that struggled
through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face seemed to him to be a little changed. The expression
looked different. One would have said there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth. He was certainly
curious. He turned round, and, walking to the window, drew the blinds up. The bright dawn
flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky quarters where they lay shuddering.
But the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there,
to be more intensified even. The quivering, ardent sunlight showed the lines of cruelty
around the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after he had done some
dreadful thing. He winced, and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory cupids
that Lord Henry had given him, he glanced hurriedly into it. No line like that warped his red lips,
but what did it mean? He rubbed his eyes, came close to the picture, and examined it again.
There were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual painting,
and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered. It was not a mere
fancy of his own that the thing was horribly apparent. He threw himself into a chair and
began to think. Suddenly there flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward's
studio the day the picture had been finished. Yes, he remembered it perfectly. He had uttered a
his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and
his sins, that the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and thought,
and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood.
Surely his prayer had not been answered. Such things were impossible. It seemed monstrous to
think of them, and yet there was the picture before him with a touch of cruelty in the mouth.
Cruelty? Had he been cruel? It was the girl's fault, not his. He had dreamed of her as a
great artist, had given his love to her because he had thought her great.
Then she had disappointed him. She had been shallow and unworthy.
And yet a feeling of infinite regret came over him as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing
like a little child. He remembered with what callousness he had watched her. Why had he been
made like that? Why had such a soul been given to him? But he suffered also. During the three
terrible hours as the play lasted he had lived centuries of pain, eon upon eon of torture.
His life was well worth hers. She admired him for a moment, if he wounded her for an age.
Besides, women were better suited to bear sorrow than men. They lived on their emotions. They only
thought of their emotions. When they took lovers it was merely to have someone with whom they could
have scenes. Lord Henry told him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were. Why should he trouble
Sibyl Vane? She was nothing to him now. But the picture! What was he to say of that?
It held the secret of his life and told his story. It had taught him to love his own beauty.
Would it teach him to loathe his own soul? Would he ever look at it again?
No. It was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses. The horrible night that he had
passed had left phantoms behind it. Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck
that makes men mad. The picture had not changed. It was folly to think so. Yet it was watching him,
with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile. Its bright hair gleamed in the early
sunlight. Its blue eyes met his own. A sense of infinite pity, not for himself but for the
painted image of himself, came over him. It had altered already and would alter more. Its gold
would wither into grey. Its red and white roses would die. For every sin that he committed a stain
would fleck and wreck its fairness. But he would not sin. The picture, changed or unchanged,
would be to him the visible emblem of conscience. He would resist temptation. He would not see Lord
Henry any more. Would not, at any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil
Hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things. He would go
back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends, marry her, try to love her again. Yes, it was his duty to
do so. She must have suffered more than he did, poor child. He had been selfish and cruel to her.
The fascination that she had exercised over him would return. They would be happy together. His
life with her would be beautiful and pure. He got up from his chair and drew a large screen
right in front of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.
How horrible! he murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.
When he stepped out onto the grass he drew a deep breath. The fresh morning air seemed to drive
away all his sombre passions he thought only of Sibyl Vane. A faint echo of his love came back to
him. He repeated her name over and over again. The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched
garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.